Add page covering differences between Publisher and Studio integrations (#758)
chili-publish/grafx-documentation: docs/GraFx-Developers/grafx-studio/studio-publisher-integration-differences/index.md

# Moving From Existing GraFx Publisher Integrations

If you're moving an existing GraFx Publisher workflow to use GraFx Studio, an important factor to consider is the integration layer. This page will lay out key integration differences between the two products, and provide general guidance for replicating existing GraFx Publisher integrations in GraFx Studio.

## Editor vs. API Integrations

This guide is split into two broad sections:

1. **Editor Integrations** - Embedding the GraFx Studio (or Publisher) editor in your frontend site
2. **API Integrations** - Using our REST libraries to directly access resources and functionalities on the GraFx environment level

In frontend integrations, these two layers often work in tandem. For the purposes of organizing this guide, though, they will be treated as separate.

---

## Editor Integrations

> Integrating the GraFx Publisher editor is done by directly embedding an authenticated editor URL in an `iframe` element on your own site. While this makes for a very simple integration process, there are a few fundamental drawbacks to relying on `iframe` integrations. In light of those drawbacks, GraFx Studio was designed to not rely on `iframe` embedding for integrating the editor. Instead, we provide open-source libraries to directly build the editor elements in your own sites.

Reviewer: The original wording implied the `iframe` wasn't really used, which confused me. It only clicked once I realized that in Publisher the editor and engine are the same thing, whereas in Studio they're separate. Without understanding that split, the original text makes it sound like Studio simply isn't `iframe`-based. My revision spells out the split explicitly: the real difference isn't `iframe` vs. no `iframe`, but whether you get the full editor experience in one URL package or the experience is split into separate packages.

```suggestion
Integrating the GraFx Publisher editor is done by directly embedding an authenticated editor URL in an `iframe` element on your own site, which delivers the full editor UI experience in a single package. While this makes for a very simple integration process, there is a fundamental drawback to having the entire experience delivered by one URL inside an `iframe`. GraFx Studio, by contrast, was built from the ground up around a clear split between the **engine** and the **editor** — two experiences that live separately. So instead of a single URL that packages the whole UI into an `iframe`, we provide open-source libraries that let you build the editor elements directly in your own sites.
```

The simple answer for how to integrate the GraFx Studio editor is to use [Studio UI](https://github.com/chili-publish/studio-ui), an open-source, pre-built end-user workspace. **If you are looking for a direct alternative to plug-and-play GraFx Publisher `iframe` integrations, this is what you should use.**

### Can I Integrate GraFx Studio via `iframe`?

> The short answer is "no". One of the main reasons the GraFx Publisher editor works well with `iframes` is that GraFx Publisher editor URLs come pre-authenticated with an active API key. This means that anybody who has an active GraFx Publisher editor URL can directly access the template, without having ever authenticated through GraFx. GraFx Studio URLs, on the other hand, do **not** come pre-authenticated, so placing a Template or Project URL directly in an `iframe` will redirect users to login via GraFx rather than open the editor experience directly.

Reviewer: I streamlined the top and then just explain the difference directly — I think this avoids getting too into the weeds without leaving the situation vague or making it seem complicated in a "bad way".

```suggestion
The short answer is "no". GraFx Publisher used pre-authenticated URLs that came with the full editor workspace packaged in. GraFx Studio does not provide such a URL, so placing a Template or Project URL directly in an `iframe` will simply redirect users to log in via GraFx rather than open the editor experience directly.
```

> In reality, this question demands a much more nuanced and complex answer. But, in the context of moving an integration from GraFx Publisher to GraFx Studio, there is no means of obtaining a direct, pre-authenticated GraFx Studio editor URL to embed in an `iframe`.

Reviewer: (Continues the change above — replaces the "nuanced answer" caveat with a concrete explanation of the engine/editor split.)

```suggestion
GraFx Studio instead provides a rendering engine you plug directly into. Using the [Studio SDK](https://chili-publish.github.io/studio-sdk/), you pass it the parent element for the engine to load, a Studio document JSON, an integration token, and a GraFx Environment API base URL, and behind the scenes it sets up and renders the Studio document. For the full end-user experience, we instead recommend [Studio UI](https://github.com/chili-publish/studio-ui), which comes with a complete end-user UX along with a `studioUILoaderConfig` function — you supply similar information through one simple build function, together with the project ID.
```

### Can I Use JavaScript to Interact with the GraFx Studio Editor?

Yes! You can use the [Studio SDK](https://chili-publish.github.io/studio-sdk/) library to directly interact with the editor in your own site. In [Studio UI](https://github.com/chili-publish/studio-ui), you can access the SDK via the `StudioUISDK` window object. This is the GraFx Studio version of using `editorObject`/`editor` with GraFx Publisher. One important structural difference is that the [Studio SDK](https://chili-publish.github.io/studio-sdk/) is promise based. If your existing GraFx Publisher integration is using PublisherInterface, then you've already handled this as that library is also promise based.

GraFx Studio integrations have the added bonus of not needing any extra steps to comply with the [Same-origin policy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Security/Defenses/Same-origin_policy); with no `iframe` embedding involved, you don't have to worry about the host differing between the edtior and your own site.

### Is Studio UI My Only Integration Option?

> No, [Studio UI](https://github.com/chili-publish/studio-ui) is just the easiest direct alternative to existing GraFx Publisher `iframe` integrations. You can check out the [Studio SDK Quickstart Guide](/GraFx-Developers/grafx-studio/studio-ui-quickstart/01-overview/) for more details on working directly with the SDK. That said, we would generally recommend working with [Studio UI](https://github.com/chili-publish/studio-ui) rather than trying to build out your own UI wrapper.

Author: ```suggestion
No, [Studio UI](https://github.com/chili-publish/studio-ui) is just the easiest direct alternative to existing GraFx Publisher `iframe` integrations. You can check out the [Studio SDK Quickstart Guide](/GraFx-Developers/grafx-studio/editor-engine/studio-sdk-quickstart/01-overview/) for more details on working directly with the SDK. That said, we would generally recommend working with [Studio UI](https://github.com/chili-publish/studio-ui) rather than trying to build out your own UI wrapper.
```

---

## API Integrations

Like GraFx Publisher, GraFx Studio exposes a comprehensive set of REST API endpoints to interact with resources on the GraFx environment. There are a few key differences when moving from a GraFx Publisher API workflow to a GraFx Studio one.

### Swagger Documentation

You can access Swagger documentation for the GraFx Environment API via:

```
https://{yourEnvironmentName}.chili-publish.online/grafx/swagger
```

### Authentication

> The Environment API uses Bearer Token authorization, and a standard oAuth2 Client Credentials flow to generate tokens. This means that instead of environment-specific `/apikey` endpoints to generate authentication headers, you would use our generic oAuth server endpoint to generate tokens (see [Generating a Token](/GraFxDevelopers/environment-api/02-generating-a-token/)).

Author: ```suggestion
The Environment API uses Bearer Token authorization, and a standard oAuth2 Client Credentials flow to generate tokens. This means that instead of environment-specific `/apikey` endpoints to generate authentication headers, you would use our generic oAuth server endpoint to generate tokens (see [Generating a Token](/GraFx-Developers/environment-api/03-generating-a-token/)).
```
